# Abstract
## Evaluating CDR Data Usage on Excluded Demographics in South Asian Countries 
Nitu Girish Mohan    
11/18/20           

When a major natural disaster occurs, such as an earthquake, massive amounts of the population can get displaced. Effective disaster response for displaced populations in underdeveloped regions is critical for keeping morbidity and mortality rates low post-disaster. Especially with rapid movements of large amounts of people, infectious diseases such as Cholera and Ebola can become more lethal. Current methods such as transport surveys and manual registration at relief hubs are slow and are sometimes unavailable for those who are the most vulnerable. Unfortunately, finding and accessing timely and accurate data can be quite difficult to find, and accurate data and analysis are completed and distributed many months after the actual disaster. Specifically looking at South Asia, Nepal’s response to the 2015 earthquake, the increase in floods in Southern India, which can lead to landslides, and Bangladesh's vulnerability to climate change, there is a relevant and immediate need for efficiency in disaster response. Looking ahead, data usage, especially with de-identified CDR data, for rescue operations and relief efforts can prove to be a major aid in increasing life expectancy, protective security, and transparency guarantees, as described by Amartya Sen.       

CDR data is massively useful in that it uses current data. Calls or texts are routed to nearby network masts. By recording that data and analyzing it, population movement can be tracked over time. CDRs, call detail records, are the data points that hold the timestamp and network mast of an event; an event can be considered as receiving/making a call or sending/receiving a text message. The CDRs can provide a way to track population movement over time and aid rescue operations in locating displaced people. This method was proven quite effective during the 2015 Gorkha, Nepal earthquake.     

As CDR data becomes more and more available, due to rising mobile phone ownership rates, it is also becoming more valuable for usage during disaster response. But, even then it has its own biases. It can exclude groups, forming a bias in the data. This bias creates a lower chance of rescue for women, poor, rural, young, and elderly. There is also bias between males and females, higher-income groups, and some age-specific demographics, that are more likely to own a mobile phone than others. The exclusion of those without a cellphone can impact the data to underestimate the number of people affected by a disaster and lower their chance of survival. Furthermore, those without access to a cell phone whether due to their age, economic background, or location are not counted in the data and can be misrepresented.      

 
