# 8/25 Human Development Response

  I understood that data science has been growing rapidly, but I did not realize how it could cause more harm than the benefit intended. If scientists, researchers, and countless organizations are using the data to help others, the data should be used to help the ones who need it the most. With data, I think it has to be analyzed and understood from all perspectives, otherwise, these “pitfalls" could occur at a much higher frequency. 

  One of the pitfalls that resonated with me greatly was the “unanticipated effects.” Especially when the article discussed the value of the data and how that is perceived. It reminded me of a book I had been reading called Invisible Women. In the book, it discussed the clearing of roads after a heavy snowfall, and how roads were more likely to be cleared before sidewalks and walkways. The timing of the clearing often benefited those with a 9 - 5 job and a vehicle. What the data didn't incorporate is that women, in a household with one vehicle, are less likely to use that vehicle for transportation. They are more likely to walk or use public transportation. But even further, if the woman is using a vehicle, they have other responsibilities such as dropping off children or helping elderly relatives. This impacts the timing as their commute, as it is much greater than for just a 9 - 5 job. Hearing about these effects helped me realize that multiple views need to be taken to process the data. 

  Although, the "promises" do give me some hope. I did not realize the methods of receiving and collecting data could somehow be biased. But now with that realization, I hope that scientists and researchers can actively and consciously avoid these biases to get a more perfect data sample. Also, "customizing" the methods and how the data is viewed to analyze certain demographics is something I hadn't thought about before. To reach a more humble data science, I think we have to look further than just what the data is telling us and understand what the impacts could be. We need to focus more on the process than the actual outcome; with a diligent and detailed process, the outcome can avoid more of these "pitfalls."

