## In-Class Essay: Human Development & Data Science Knowledge Creation    

The world is rapidly growing and evolving as time goes on. Multiple phenomena and trends interact with each other and the outcomes often go unanalyzed or unnoticed. But with the arrival of data science and analysis, we are able to understand complex adaptive systems in the many forms, but specifically cities, the economy, and how we interact with each other. As Geoff West puts it, we are able to understand the “conceptual framework underlying all of these very different highly complex phenomena.”    
	
When looking at a complex system, it is made up of “individual constituents” that when together don’t take on a physical form but have major impacts. West provides the example of how your consciousness, personality, and character all interact to make up the complex system of you. For years, we have studied these complex systems and learned that breaking a system down to its independently acting parts is “naive.” Data science and analysis “recognizes the kind of interaction/interdependence that is often ignored,” and it can help with problems in the long run, such as sustainability of energy and the planet itself. It allows us to quantify phenomena that underlies our cities, companies/businesses, and even the social structures we are a part of, especially when these characteristics are so complex and large; we can scale them to an analyzable and relative scale. Utilizing data, West is able to take a biological approach to such a complex system and get out scaling laws that accurately apply.       

West defines a city as a “complex adaptive system from the integration of energy, resources, and inhabitants.” Large populations inhabit cities; 80% of the U.S. population resides within them. They are so large and involved, but even then, they are subject to scaling trends. Cities are approximately scaled versions of each other. There is data that proves this concept in cities within the same country, such as San Francisco to New York and Nagoya to Tokyo.This applies to their socioeconomic characteristics as well. “Data also reveals that socioeconomic quantities (average wages, number of crimes and restaurants) also scale in a regular and systematic fashion.” Without data science, understanding the scale that exists between and within cities would be unheard of. West specifically applies a biological approach when trying to understand the complex adaptive system that is a city. His conclusion shows, when a city’s infrastructure is the focus, “cities behave like organisms.” They scale sublinearly, have power-law behavior, and have a systematic economy of scale. Taking into account the physical infrastructure along with the socio economic activity of a city, both can be analyzed as “self-similar fractal-like network structures.” And the study of cities is nowhere near complete. Extensive data sets are becoming more and more available from rapidly developing countries, such as Brazil and China

Looking further to social systems, there exists a “systematic self-similarity and fractal-like geometry.” Robin Dunbar, an evolutionary psychologist, was able to show how an “average individual's entire social network can be deconstructed into a hierarchical sequence of discrete nested clusters whose sizes follow a surprising regular pattern.” I particularly enjoy West’s analogy to biology in that the hidden fractal nature of social networks could be a represenationation of the physical structures of our brain. He specifically looks at the white and gray matter of the brain and how both the matter and social systems are representations of fractal-like hierarchical networks. Both of these conclusions/speculations of “understanding and deconstructing the hierarchy of social group structures” came about with the advent of data analysis. Going even further, “the degree to which the scaling of infrastructure and energy use, if sublinear, is predicted to be the same as the degree to which the scaling of the number of an average individual's social interactions is superlinear.” Utilizing the conclusions, West is able to define the relationships of infrastructure, energy use, and an individual’s social interactions. Combining the idea of this scale with cities and social systems, West shows that “the strength of social interaction in the flows of informations exchanges are greatest between terminal units (individuals) and systematically decrease up the hierarchy of group structures, leading to superlinear scaling, increasing returns, and an accelerating pace of life.” Data science allows scientists, such as Geoff West, to quantify the underlying phenomena and trends of such complex systems and their interactions.      

Data science can also help understand the system of our economy and how individuals and companies interact with it. Looking again at West’s biology analogy, the “growth and mortality curve of companies is similar to an organism's curve of systematic sublinear scaling.” Understanding the lifespan of companies can help businesses make decisions and understand how that could impact costs. An interesting metric, the composite risk index, is used to address risk in financial markets. This utilizes the “impact of the risk event multiplied by the probability of its occurrence” to provide a dollar amount of the “estimated damage.” This is an amazingly useful metric, utilizing data science, for businesses to make decisions. Furthermore, “power law distributions and models based on fractal-like behavior have been gaining greater currency in the burgeoning field of risk management.” This goes further to show how data science can apply to many fields and strengthen our knowledge of these systems.     

As data science itself grows as a field, mobile phones have been critical to increasing the amount and quality of data. CDRs, call detail records, are the data points that hold the timestamp and network mast of an event; an event can be considered as receiving/making a call or sending/receiving a text message. This data is especially useful in disaster response, as current methods are inadequate at working efficiently during the direct aftermath and disorganization of a disaster. This can also show some of the downfalls of data science. As CDR data is more commonly used, it can exclude groups, forming a bias in the data. This bias creates a lower chance of rescue for women, poor, rural, young, and elderly. There is also bias between males and females, higher-income groups, and some age-specific groups, that are more likely to own a mobile phone than others. The exclusion of those not without a cellphone can impact the data to underestimate the amount of people affected by a disaster and lower their chance of survival. This is relevant, but I believe fixable consequences of current data science methods. Certain methods, such as process-based modeling and Bayesian networks, can help forecast storms and the consequences/effects of the storm. These models can help speed up the analysis of such forecasts and be integrated to city response and relief systems. When implemented, data science helps advance the understanding of human behavior, for example how people react to evacuation or stay at home orders. If less time is taken and a "false warning" is put out, this can damage trust between society and forecasters; it can lead to a loss of transparency guarantees, a necessary freedom as explained by Amartya Sens. This lack of trust can cause problems when decisions are not taken seriously. Furthermore, as climate change affects the habitability of certain areas, weather intensity, and how cities utilize resources, data science can be useful in understanding the sustainability of certain areas and cities.    

Across many fields, data science has already proven to be a useful resource in decision-making, planning, and response. It has also provided an understanding to systems that we were unable to put a scale to. Cities, the economy, and social systems trends and phenomena especially have been quantified to an analyzable and predictable scale by data science. I believe data science is a field with huge potential for the future. As a revolution in measurement occurs, revolutions of science follow, as described by Sinan Aral. When that revolution occurs, data science will be at the forefront.     















