# 9/17 Human Development & Data Science Insights  
  When a major natural disaster occurs, such as an earthquake, massive amounts of the population can get displaced. This rapid movement of people can lead to an increase in mortality, especially in areas with infectious diseases (cholera, ebola). Unfortunately, finding and accessing timely and accurate data can be quite difficult to find. Current methods such as transport surveys and manual registration at relief hubs are slow and are sometimes unavailable for those who are the most vulnerable. But now, scientists are looking towards de-identified mobile data to aid in this process.   
  This data can help in tracking the locations of large populations, especially those displaced by the disaster. Calls or texts are routed to nearby network masts. By recording that data and analyzing it, population movement can be tracked over time. CDRs, call detail records,  are the data points that hold the timestamp and network mast of an event; an event can be considered as receiving/making a call or sending/receiving a text message. The CDRs can provide a way to track population movement over time and aid rescue operations in locating displaced people. So far, evidence has shown that CDR-based mobility data provides the most current data for population movements in low and middle-income countries.    
  This method was used after the 2015 April Gorkha earthquake. In Nepal, a massive earthquake with a 7.8Mw hit. It caused major damage through avalanches and aftershocks.  The earthquake also caused a lot of damage to infrastructure and Nepal's transport network which isolated a lot of the population. To access the data, scientists complied with guidelines that were developed during the Ebola outbreak; this de-identified that data and made sure that "individual-level data" would not be accessed. They were given the data and compared it to January 2015. This comparison allowed them to track population flows and figure out where people had fled to. The scientists were able to produce preliminary results just nine days after the earthquake, and a full report nearly 2 weeks after the earthquake. This analysis had brought data more efficiently than ever before. It allowed humanitarian agencies to identify where support was needed and which regions were not recovering as well as they had intended.    
  But even then, some unprecedented issues come along with using phone data for disaster response. One is that natural disasters can damage network masts and power grids. Especially in rural areas where the density of the towers is much lower, it can exclude certain populations from the data. Another is that ownership of mobile phones is often biased against "women, the poor, rural, young, and elderly." Though phone ownership is largely starting to become ubiquitous, these populations are less likely to own a phone.    
  But disaster response is not the only field this method is being applied to. It is being used to predict and model traffic monitoring, commuting patterns, and the spread of infectious diseases such as cholera and ebola.     
  I think that this type of data method can be quite helpful no matter the situation. Whether that be a disaster or simply traveling, it can provide a lot of insight into how people move and how we can make that more efficient. In India, my family had to relocate due to intense flooding, and I'm wondering if an increase in this type of method could help people take preventive measures to be prepared for natural disasters. 

References:  
Bengtsson, L., Lu, X., Thorson, A., Garfield, R., & Schreeb, J. (2011, August 30). Improved Response to Disasters and Outbreaks by Tracking Population Movements with Mobile Phone Network Data: A Post-Earthquake Geospatial Study in Haiti. Retrieved September 16, 2020, from https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371%2Fjournal.pmed.1001083  

Gething, P., & Tatem, A. (2011, August 30). Can Mobile Phone Data Improve Emergency Response to Natural Disasters? Retrieved September 08, 2020, from https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1001085   

Wilson, R., Erbach-Schoenberg, E., Albert, M., Power, D., Tudge, S., Gonzalez, M., . . . Bengtsson, L. (2016, February 24). Rapid and Near Real-Time Assessments of Population Displacement Using Mobile Phone Data Following Disasters: The 2015 Nepal Earthquake. Retrieved September 15, 2020, from http://currents.plos.org/disasters/article/rapid-and-near-real-time-assessments-of-population-displacement-using-mobile-phone-data-following-disasters-the-2015-nepal-earthquake/

	


